---
layout: post
displaydate: "2013-01-02"
date: "2012-12-20"
published: true
title: Readings
category: course
tags: null
author: Seth Mnookin
---

There are two ways to become a better writer. The first is to write. The second is to read. We'll be doing a lot of both in this course.


**Reading List A – September 16**<br>
Thomas, Lewis, Selections from _Lives of a Cell_, 1974.<br> 
Gawande, Atul, “Letting Go,” _The New Yorker_, August 2, 2010.<br>
Zimmer, Carl, “Blink Twice if You Like Me,” _The New York Times_, June 29, 2009.<br> 
Mnookin, Seth, Introduction to _The Panic Virus_, 2011.<br>
Harmon, Amy, “Navigating Love and Autism,” _The New York Times_, December 26, 2011.<br>
Selections from “On the Origins of Science Writers,” _Not Exactly Rocket Science_, July 29. 2010.<br><br>


**Reading List B – September 23**<br>
Brosi, Berry J. and Heather M. Briggs, "Single pollinator species losses reduce floral fidelity and plant reproductive function", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS)  July 22 2013 doi:10.1073/pnas.1307438110. <br>
Gorman, James, "Loss of Bees Can Affect Plant's Ability to Reproduce, Study Finds", The New York Times, July 22, 2013. <br>
Yong, Ed. "How Loyalty Paints A Meadow" National Geographic Phenomena: Not Exactly Rocket Science, July 23, 2013. <br>
Philippe, Nadege et al., "Pandoraviruses:  Amoeba Viruses with Genomes Up to 2.5 Mb Reaching That of Parasitic Eukaryotes" Science 19 July 2013,  Vol 341 no. 6143 pp. 281-286. <br>
Timmer, John, "Largest viral genome yet carries 2,300 genes that are new to biology" ArsTechnica July 18, 2013. <br>
Zimmer, Carl, "Changing View on Virus: Not So Small After All" The New York Times  July 18, 2013. <br><br>

**Reading List C – September 30**<br>
Thompson, Hunter S., selections from 1972 campaign coverage, Rolling Stone, assorted dates, 1972. (The entirety of Thompson’s ’72 campaign and election coverage was collected in the 1973 book, Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail, 1972.) <br>
Mailer, Norman, Selections from Miami and the Siege of Chicago, Harper’s, November 1968. <br>
Didion, Joan, “Slouching Towards Bethlehem,” The Saturday Evening Post, September 23, 1967. <br>
Didion, Joan, “Insider Baseball,” New York Review of Books, October 27, 1988. <br>
Wolfe, Tom, “The Birth of ‘The New Journalism’; Eyewitness Report,” New York, February 14, 1972.<br>
Liebovich, Mark, “Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail,” The New York Times Magazine, September 2, 2012.<br><br>

**Reading List D – October 7**<br>
Liebovich, Mark, “The Man the White House Wakes Up To,” The New York Times Magazine, April 21, 2010.<br>
Allen, Mike, “Politico Playbook: June 26, 2013,” Politico, June 26, 2013.<br>
Silver, Nate, “Poll Averages Have No History of Consistent Partisan Bias,” The New York Times, September 29, 2012.<br>
Silver, Nate, “Special Coverage: The 2012 Presidential Election,” The New York Times, November 6, 2012.<br>
Silver, Nate, “Nov 2: For Romney to Win, State Polls Must Be Statistically Biased,” The New York Times, November 3, 2012.<br>
Hastings, Michael, “The Runaway General,” Rolling Stone, June 22, 2010. <br>
Taibbi, Matt, “Wall Street's Bailout Hustle,” Rolling Stone, March 4, 2010.<br>
Wallace, David Foster, “The Weasel, 12 Monkeys, and the Shrub,” Rolling Stone, April 13, 2000.<br>
Taibbi, Matt, “Hey, MSM: All Journalism is Advocacy Journalism,” Rolling Stone’s Taibblog, June 27, 2013. <br>
Corn, David, “SECRET VIDEO: Romney Tells Millionaire Donors What He REALLY Thinks of Obama Voters,” Mother Jones, September 17, 2012.<br>
Strong, Jonathan, “Stress-related condition ‘incapacitates’ Bachmann; heavy pill use alleged,” Daily Caller, July 18, 2011.<br>
Sherman, Jake, “Newt Gingrich owed six figures to Tiffany's,” Politico, May 17, 2011.<br>
Hastings, Michael, “How Obama Won The Internet,” BuzzFeed, January 8, 2013.<br>
Shepherd, Jack, “33 Animals Who Are Extremely Disappointed In You,” BuzzFeed, August 10, 2012.<br><br>

**Reading List E – November 4**<br>
Talese, Gay, “Frank Sinatra Has a Cold,” Esquire, <br>
Talese, Gay, “The Silent Season of a Hero,” Esquire, <br>
Talese, Gay, “Joe Louis: The King as a Middle-Aged Man,” Esquire, <br>
Wolfe, Tom, “There Goes (Varoom! Varoom!) That Kandy-Kolored (Thphhhhhh!) Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby (Rahghhh!) Around the Bend (Brummmmmmmmmmmmmmmmm),” TK, 1963.<br><br>

**Reading List F – November 18**<br>
Malcolm, Janet, “The Journalist and the Murderer,” Parts 1 & 2, The New Yorker, March 13 & 20, 1989.<br><br>

**Reading List G – November 25**<br>
MacFarquar, “Requiem for a Dream” The New Yorker, March 11, 2013.<br>
Sullivan, John Jeremiah, “The Final Comeback of Axl Rose,” GQ, September 2006.	<br>
Junod, Tom, “Angelina Jolie Dies For Our Sins,” Esquire, July 20, 2010.<br>
Rosenbaum, Ron, “The Worst Celebrity Profile Ever Written?” Slate, June 19, 2007.<br>
Schulz, Kathryn, “Why I Despise the Great Gatsby,” New York, May 6, 2013.<br>
Ronson, Jon, “Citizen Kubrick,” The Guardian, March 26, 2004.<br>
Kaling, Mindy, “Chick Flicks,” The New Yorker, October 3, 2011.<br>
Giraldi, William, “Kafka’s Inner Life,” New Republic, April 3, 2013.