---
layout: post
published: false
title: "Active Mind and Inactive Hand: MIT Student Activism"
category: politics
author: Noalee Harel
tags: 
  - student
---

## Active Mind and Inactive Hand: MIT Student Activism

It did not take long for me to recognize the state of political activism – or lack thereof – on MIT’s campus. During my freshman year, I got involved with a political advocacy group called MIT Students for Israel that plans campus events to educate about Israel’s politics, culture and history. But soon after joining the group, I realized that there was no audience on campus for what we were trying to do – planning events wasn’t easy, and the regularly low turnout was anything but inspiring. By the time I was a sophomore, I decided to focus my time on the other organizations that I had joined – my sorority, a dance group and a high school student mentorship program – and I haven’t been politically active since. 

Reflecting on this a few semesters later raises the question: What is it about MIT that makes student activism so rare? Is it because of students like me, students who cared enough to join a cause but not enough to stay for the fight? Is it that the majority of students are “too busy” for anything but school? Is there something inherent about MIT’s culture that discourages student activism? To help answer these questions, I turned to fellow MIT students and friends at other universities. I asked them to complete a short survey about college student activism. Forty out of 43 MIT students who filled out the survey said they believed that a significant number of students on campus were not politically active. A look at their responses points to four main reasons: rigorous academics, MIT’s focus on science, the kind of students who apply to MIT, and lack of activist groups on campus.

Let’s start with MIT’s academic culture and the intensity of students’ workload. One student said, “Why attend a rally when you have four problem sets and three tests coming up? Or two tests and three interviews?” Another student brought up MIT’s “culture of pre-professionalism.” Academic drive is a not-so-distant cousin of career drive, so it makes sense that students commonly keep their life after MIT as their focus and motivation throughout their college careers. This culture might discourage activism, as fighting for a cause you believe in may not sit as nicely on your résumé as ten hours of lab research per week in addition to your five classes. “At MIT,” one respondent said, “people focus much more on self-improvement (aka learning) than political activism.” 

Looking at answers from a smaller sample of Harvard students supports the notion that MIT’s focus on science has a real impact on student activism. Five out of the seven Harvard students that responded said that a significant number of students on their campus are politically active. One of these five said, “Harvard students are more liberal-minded…The state of society is important to them, so they protest for a better world.” Is this to say that the state of society is unimportant to MIT students? Absolutely not – but our approach to making the world a better place isn’t through political activism but rather through “science and changing the world concretely,” as one student said. “MIT fosters a different community and people are more interested in solving root problems than taking sides of radical groups,” another MIT student said. 

A look into the “different community” that MIT fosters starts with the student applicants. In general, MIT attracts students who are extremely invested in academics (especially in math and science), as well as passionate about their many extracurricular activities. Often times these kinds of students “conduct little to no political exploration.” The respondent who said this also said, “That was the way I was, and MIT sort of maintains the situation; the academic rigor of the institution and [its] emphasis on math and science don’t allow time for political debates.” A respondent from Pomona College explained that Pomona’s student body is fairly knowledgeable, as well as passionate, about politics and current events, contrary to many MIT students. “We are a very liberal institution, which I think attracts very open-minded individuals who fight for issues they believe in.” 

If applicants experience “little to no political exploration” prior to their college experience, they are unlikely to become interested in activism unless the right opportunities are presented to them. A student from City College of New York mentioned “club hours,” two-hour blocks on Tuesdays and Thursdays during which nobody has class and clubs congregate in one area of campus to, in the respondent’s words, “do their thing.” MIT may have the Activities Midway (an orientation event for freshman to explore all the student groups via booths set up in the athletic center) to promote signing up for clubs, but there isn’t a weekly framework that gives students leeway to pursue causes they otherwise wouldn’t have time to explore. For applicants who come to MIT activist-ready however, “Opportunities are present for those who feel strongly about issues and want to take part in activism,” according to an MIT student response.  

Even though I was not the most politically minded person before coming to MIT, I took up one of those Activities Midway opportunities in the hopes that it would be a meaningful political advocacy experience. I chose to give up the “political activist” in me after two semesters because there was nothing that felt rewarding about the one or two minimally successful events I helped organize. However, I am beyond pleased with the personal growth experiences I have gained from the social, interest-based, and community service organizations I am still involved with. 

From the survey responses, as well as my satisfaction at this point in my MIT career, I have concluded that it’s not a bad thing that MIT is a politically inactive school. It’s not a good thing either. It’s another aspect of being a student in this one-of-a-kind town of nerds – an experience I’d advocate for any day. 

Link to survey results: 
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0AoB2ixkE3gS0dDdUaVVqc20zS1REQ3ZKS2p3dWpwU1E&usp=sharing 

