---
layout: post
published: false
title: The Not So Revolutionary Changes...
category: MIT
author: Keerti Shukla
displaydate: October 24 2014
date: October 24 2014
tags: 
  - student
---

In the past decade, Massachusetts along with the rest of the nation has gone on a Green Energy splurge. Individuals and corporations feel more of a responsibility to do their part in saving the environment. With energy independence as their goal, some companies try to discover “game-changing” technologies that will disrupt the market instead of incrementally improving existing technologies. The entrepreneurs that lead these companies look for novel, sustainable, and reliable forms of energy that have less of an impact on the plant. They have invested time and money in research to develop more efficient laptop batteries, wind turbines, solar cells, etc.

Take A123 Systems, for example. In 2005, this company spun-off from a research group at MIT. They hoped to bring a higher-power and faster-recharging lithium ion battery to the market place. Batteries with this new material had not yet proved to be as reliable as the current lithium ion battery. A123 spent the next 7 years enhancing their doped nanophosphate-based battery technology trying to make it as reliable and powerful. Though the company had to file for bankruptcy before reaching their ultimate goal their research and development influenced the future of electric and hybrid cars and energy storage systems using batteries. 

Take Aeronatuica Windpower and Ogin Energy. Both companies sought to develop more efficient technologies for wind turbines since existing technologies are not nearly as reliable as fossil fuels or natural gas. Aeronautica produces stall-regulated wind turbines that could be installed in suburbs for the common consumer as well as micro grids for large-scale energy production.  Ogin produced smaller wind turbines with a lobed two-stage diffuser that could be installed in smaller spaces making turbines more accessible to the every-day consumers. Since wind cannot be a consistent energy source, wing turbines are unable to compete with fossil fuels. However, they have helped ease the CO2 emissions by providing other forms of energy production.

While these companies have tried to develop revolutionary technologies, others seek out more incremental changes. In an effort to make electricity more reliable, Tetra Tech, a lead environmental consultant has evaluated a new way to distribute electricity. Tetra Tech, on behalf of Massachusetts and the SeaLink Project, has supported implementing a new technology that will run electric cables under the ocean to Boston and neighboring suburbs. This prevents extreme weather conditions from affecting the transmission of electricity to those on the grid. The cables will run along the same path as the existing Hibernia Networks telecom cables. The electric cables will be continuously monitored with thermal sensors and fiber optics. Part of making energy and electricity more efficient is making it more reliable. In the Northeast, it is especially important to protect electrical lines due to the frequent severe weather condition. When lines collapse energy, States have to spend a significant amount of money keeping the public safe and repairing lines in a timely fashion. Now, with lines running under the water, less are likely to fail in heavy winds or precipitation. 

Chevron is another large company tackling environmental issues. This past summer, as a Materials Engineering intern for them, I was able to see first hand how even large companies like Chevron have become more environmentally conscious. A company usually so driven by profit margins has taken on the economic burden of spending money to make their oil and gas production processes more environmentally friendly. Some say they were forced too after a large fire at their refinery in Richmond, California. But regardless of why they did it, the city of Richmond and the state of California have taken notice of their commitment to minimize air pollution. Though Chevron has only taken small steps, their impact is quite large. People need energy and still depend on oil and gas. If the large oil and gas corporations make incremental improvements we can see a large effect.  

While developing new technologies is often exciting and more luring, incrementally changing old ones or established industries can often have a larger impact, especially in the short term. The world is still heavily dependent on fossil fuels. But if companies like Chevron and cities like Boston take the initiative to 
