---
layout: post
published: false
title: "A Window to MIT's Glass Lab"
category: science
---

## A New Post
	
    Tucked away in the depths of MIT’s underground tunnel system, just below MIT’s innovative Laboratory for Advanced Materials and new mit.Nano building, you can find a workshop with students working over molten glass of temperatures higher than 1,600*F. Every year, down in this basement laboratory, several lucky MIT students get to learn the ancient art of glassblowing surrounded by furnaces that can reach temperatures of up to 2,000*F and which often stay hot for days allowing the glass to "cool" properly. This hidden gem is MIT’s Glass lab, where students can take classes on glass-blowing and glass-working, and there will soon be even more opportunities for students to test their artisan skills. A $2.2 million renovation of MIT’s Glass Lab and metal foundry began last June and should finish in time for its very popular January classes.  This program is unique to MIT, and its very existence is surprising when you consider that MIT is known for its reputation for innovation and focus on engineering programs.

	The director of the lab, Peter Houk, said the main goal of the glass lab is to reinforce the MIT experience through teamwork, improvisation, cross-disciplinary thinking and a strong sense of community. While other university glass programs focus on producing professional artists, MIT’s program is geared more toward allowing students from many disciplines to “get their hands dirty.” Starting in 1986 the lab started offering classes and seminars to introduce them to the art. Rising in popularity through the nineties, the Introductory Glass Blowing Class won the title of most over-subscribed class at MIT in the early 2000's, and those students lucky enough to take this class aren't only undergrads.

	“One of the reasons that the Glass Lab classes are open to every member of the MIT community is that we want people with all kinds of backgrounds to share ideas,” says Houk. Working with MIT’s Department of Mechanical Engineering and the Media Lab, the Glass lab has been able to create a 3D printer that prints molten glass. A small team has been working on this 3D printing project, which drips molten glass at around 2,000*F from a small kiln that moves just as the printing mechanism of a 3D printer does. Another collaborative effort was the creation of the MIT Glass Band, a class where students were able to explore the sounds of glass with professors and professional glass-workers.  An innovative software, VirtualGlass, for modeling glass-blowing was developed with help from a visiting artist and one of MIT’s computer science professors. “I have found that when people who work in different fields get together, you can end up with some really outside-the-box ideas," says Houk.

	Since the Glass Lab’s Introductory Glass-Blowing class became the most oversubscribed course at MIT, it has remained at its peak of popularity with over 200 students vying for a spot in the January class of only 16 people. “It is the popularity of the program that drove the campaign to renovate and expand the space,” explains Houk, “the main goal of the renovation is to provide this experience for twice the number of students we were able to serve in the past.” Along with expanding workshop space to accommodate more students, the renovation project also includes installing a new display case in MIT’s Infinite Corridor, updating old equipment, and installing a new casting kiln, which will benefit both the glass program and the metal forge/foundry programs at MIT. 

	Funding for these renovations has come from several sources. Fundraising in MIT’s Glass Lab, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, and the forge/foundry program has contributed to the cost along with over $2 million dollars from various partners in Development that the Glass Lab has worked with. MIT has also absorbed some of the cost into its annual renewal budget, and Houk described paying for the renovations as “a team effort.”	

	Each year, the Glass lab self-funds by raising money at events like the annual MIT Great Glass Pumpkin Patch event. Started fourteen years ago, this event is now a vital part of the Glass Lab’s program, as it is the major source of revenue and also the student’s biggest showcase of pieces. All year, students and professors create glass pumpkins that are stored and sold one weekend in late September, and this years Pumpkin Patch was a big success. Houk explained another aspect of the Pumpkin Patch’s importance; it “directly involves the students in the continued operation of the lab, so they feel a sense of ownership and responsibility for it. One other thing: blowing lots of pumpkins is a great way for beginners to get better at glass blowing. They like the chance to practice. When you do something again and again, you learn to get good at it.”

	MIT’s Glass Lab, though focused on a practice that is thousands of years old,  practices innovation everyday. Houk says “ I love the environment that gives rise to ideas like Virtual Glass, glass musical instruments, and a hot glass 3D printer.” The sense of community is very strong in the lab as well, with “a wide range of people, from freshmen to grad students, to alumni who have stayed in the area and help teach the beginners.” Thanks to these renovations, more students will be able to join this community and take advantage of one of the unique opportunities that MIT provides.

Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
