---
layout: post
published: false
title: ""
category: MIT
author: Zoe Sheinkopf
---

	Suzanne Corkin has the bright corner office you’d expect of a distinguished senior faculty member at an elite university. It’s on the fifth floor of the Brain and Cognitive Sciences building on MIT’s campus, and the walls are mostly window. I step over a rubber chew toy, strewn by the other inhabitant of the office: Trooper, Corkin’s docile dog. On the bookshelf is a framed collage of pictures of Henry Molaison, whose brain Corkin has studied for the past five decades. I notice a pink hat painted to look like a  brain hanging on a coat rack. “Nice thinking cap,” I say.
	“Do you want to keep it?” she answers.
	Corkin is a Professor Emerita in Behavioral Neuroscience at MIT. She officially retired in 2012, but she still serves on committees, publishes papers, gives talks, attends conferences, advises undergraduates, and mentors junior faculty. But she considers teaching to be the most important thing she can do.
	During her career, Corkin uncovered truths about the way humans store memories, through the study of Henry Molaison (known until his death in 2008 as HM), the famous amnesic. But still, she wants to do more. “Everybody wants to make some sort of contribution to the world; I don’t feel like I’ve made such a gigantic one...there are really very ordinary people who change the world, and I think compared to them I am nothing...I wish I could do something in my own little way that would help hundreds of people.”
	“The biggest impact that any of us have is in teaching. People don’t always put teaching on the front burner, they put their research on the front burner, and I certainly did that too, but our biggest impact is not in the little crumbs we contribute to science, it’s what we pass along to our students. Of course the information is critical...but, you know, we teaching them other things too. Like ‘don’t take no for an answer’ and ‘prepare prepare prepare’ and ‘don’t neglect women and minorities-- in your research or your thinking or your everyday life’.”

	Corkin was born in Hartford, Connecticut, and studied clinical psychology as an undergraduate at Smith College. She was originally premed. “I wanted to help people, corny as that sounds.” But she hated her first chemistry class and decided not to go into medicine. Her study of neuroscience, and especially her work with HM, started quite accidentally. As a graduate student at McGill University in Montreal, she read a paper by the father of a childhood friend. It was about an experimental procedure on a severe epileptic: a bilateral temporal lobectomy. 
    At the time, treatment for epilepsy often included cutting away parts of the brain implicated in seizures. However, the roles of the various parts of the brain were not really known, so much was learned from the deficits sustained by people who had had parts of their brains surgically removed. In the case of HM, the neurosurgeon, ______ Scoville, tried something that had never been done before: he completely cut away both sides of HM’s hippocampus, a seahorse-shaped structure deep in the left and right temporal lobes.
	The patient was HM. Though his seizures abated, the side effects devastated his personal life and independence. HM lost the ability to form new memories after the surgery. He still had his childhood memories, and his working memory was unchanged, but his brain could no longer encode information retained for a few seconds into longer-term memories.
	When I ask Corkin about how she met HM, she passes me a signed copy of her book, Permanent Present Tense. “That’s for you,” she says. It’s his biography. “I don’t like to think of it as my memoir, but it is.”
	Corkin first met HM in 1962, when she was researching for her PhD thesis on the effect of surgical epilepsy treatment on somatosensory (touch) memory. She tested many epilepsy patients, but was especially excited to work with HM and two other amnesic cases-- though she didn’t foresee that working with the young man with no memory would define the rest of her career. “Basically, he fell in my lap…I knew he wasn’t a run-of-the-mill epilepsy patient. But I never had any idea how extremely famous he would become, or that I would study him for the next forty-six years.”

	Corkin would join the faculty at MIT in 1964 and continue studying HM until his death in 2008 (she’s still studying his postmortem brain). When she arrived (for the first __ years), she was the only woman faculty member in the Brain and Cognitive Sciences Department. “The first time I started thinking about women’s issues was not when I set foot on MIT’s campus. I was gender-blind. When I came here in 1964, guess how many women were on the faculty, the entire MIT faculty.” She waits for me to guess.
	Ten?
	“Three.”
	There had never been a woman department head. But still, I never asked, ‘where are the women?’” But then, in XXXX, she was approached by Nancy Hopkins, a professor of biology.
	Hopkins had been noticing things that made working for MIT hard for other women. “It was like they were invisible,” she said when I spoke with her over the phone. “It was easier to see with other women. With myself, it felt like-- maybe I wasn’t as good.” 
	But the small instances of discrimination added up. In [year], Hopkins requested extra lab space from the head of the biology department-- a mundane request. She was denied. “I couldn’t do my research,” she said. She told the department head that her colleagues had been given bigger lab spaces, without having to ask. He wouldn’t believe her. If a male professor got an offer from another university, he would get a promotion as an incentive to stay-- women weren’t granted such perks. For 20 years, she told herself she just needed to work harder, do a better experiment, and then she’d get the same funding, resources, and recognition as her male colleagues. “It’s harder to accept that you’re not being judged for your work. It’s easier to believe you’re not good enough.”
	Hopkins approached the other women faculty with her observations and was surprised by the response. “We had each individually figured it out. I was shocked; I thought I was the only one.” 
	Corkin didn’t have that revelation until the conversation began. “I was pretty gender-neutral for many years at MIT, and then I sort of woke up. [It was] Nancy’s starting the discussions. One day Molly Potter walked into my office...and she said, ‘Sue, would you like to have a bigger office?’ And I’m looking around the room; I said, ‘sure!’ But it never occurred to me I was in this cramped little space.”
	But many had noticed, and no one had talked about it. They didn’t want to complain, or appear incompetent. “I wouldn’t go near feminism...feminists were seen as radical cooks, complainers. We just wanted to be serious scientists,” said Hopkins. “Feminism was seen as the kiss of death professionally. Sometimes we were even afraid to meet together: that many women going into a room, people would think something weird was going on,” Hopkins said. But they met anyway.
	“[Hopkins] invited me and a couple of other people to have lunch, just in somebody’s office. So we brought our little brown bag lunches and we sat around a table and talked about how we were treated in our departments and by MIT in general. And then this group gradually grew until there were sixteen of us,” Corkin said. “After several discussions, somebody drafted a letter...to the Dean of Science, Bob Birgeneau. And there was one woman who didn’t sign it, but all the other senior women faculty in the school of science signed it.”
	“We collected data about salaries and data about space and data about perks...as good scientists, we collected data. And they spoke for us,” Corkin said. The Dean took the letter seriously, and a committee formed to investigate the discrimination through interviews and further data collection. The result was “A Study on the Status of Women Faculty in Science at MIT”, a groundbreaking report that showed inequity in “space, amount of 9-month salary paid from individual research grants, teaching assignments, awards and distinctions, inclusion on important committees and assignments within the department” (from the report itself [hyperlink]). 
	When the committee published its report in 1999, it made the front page of the New York Times and the Boston Globe. Never before had a prominent university voluntarily outed itself on gender discrimination. The Times article [hyperlink] begins:

In an extraordinary admission, top officials at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the most prestigious science and engineering university in the country, have issued a report acknowledging that female professors here suffer from pervasive, if unintentional, discrimination.
''I have always believed that contemporary gender discrimination within universities is part reality and part perception,'' the university's president, Charles M. Vest, said in comments to be published in the faculty newsletter within days and already posted on the World Wide Web. ''True, but I now understand that reality is by far the greater part of the balance.''
	“I got lots of responses…‘thank you, this is happening to me’...I had no idea it was so widespread,” Hopkins said.
	“Places like Stanford and Harvard, top-tier schools, all came to MIT to see how we did it,” Corkin said. “And now, a month ago they all came back again, to compare notes on progress.”
	The “MIT9”, nine of the nation’s top universities, has met at MIT annually since 2001, focusing first on improving equality for women faculty, and then expanding to address issues faced by underrepresented minorities.

	Even as a woman at the top of her field, Corkin says it’s sometimes hard to feel like a part of the “old boys club.” She says people shy away from being the token woman on a panel, or the token woman speaker at a symposium. She tells them: “any time you get invited to give a talk, you say YES, and you make sure that you give a better talk than any of the men in the symposium. And never say no. It’s just feeding into the hands of the people who are trying to let women fall between the cracks. And it’s fine, it’s fine with being the token woman. There’s nothing wrong with being the token woman. Absolutely nothing wrong with it. You just see it as an opportunity, and you go for it, and you try to bring other women aboard, too. Spoken as a token woman.”
	I give in to the impulse to submit my own experience. “It can be a lot of pressure, though. It can feel like you feel like you have you prove yourself in order to be taken seriously the same amount as everybody else.”
	“Absolutely. You do. There is pressure, and you just do it. You have to be tough.”
	This lesson is part of what Corkin has taught her students. Margaret Keane, who did her graduate and PhD work under Corkin in the eighties and now is a professor in the Psychology Department at Wellesley College, benefitted from Corkin’s support. “She communicated a real sense of confidence in my abilities,” Keane said. Corkin clearly put in the time to help her students improve. “I got back my first major paper as a grad student, and it was just covered in red ink, edits and comments; it was a ton of work on her part… When you help someone with writing, you help them with their thinking.” And the care Corkin took with her students showed: “For the annual holiday party, Sue would compose a poem for every single person in the lab. That always blew me away, that she would take the time to write something about each individual.”

	But even with all she’s accomplished, Corkin wants to do more. “I wish I could do something in my own little way that would help hundreds of people. I’m retired but I’m still working very hard so I have almost no free time, discretionary time, but I’ve thought about things that I could do right in my community. I live in Charlestown, and there are a lot of poor people there and uneducated people there and a lot of family strife, and I’m thinking why don’t I just go into the school and help kids learn math, or read them stories, or just talk with them about how you get along in the world without getting into trouble. Or I’ve also thought about going into prisons. There are people in prisons who want to learn things. And I’m a teacher. So, maybe I could... organize a group to read Shakespeare or something.”

	“Have you started writing?” she asks, as I get up to leave our second interview. 
	I have.
	“So you have an introductory paragraph that says, ‘I’m going to talk about three things, A, B, and C’, and then you talk about A and then you talk about B and then you talk about C, and at the end you say, ‘I talked about A, B, and C’, and then you put ‘here’s my conclusion about A, about B, and about C’.”
	“Not quite like that.”
	It’s clear that when she says teaching is her main mission, she means it.