---
layout: post
published: false
author: Deborah Chen
link: ""
displaydate: "October 13, 2015"
date: ""
category: MIT
tags: 
  - "null"
title: "Peer Ears: What's confidential, and what's not? "
---

![] https://scontent.xx.fbcdn.net/hphotos-xfa1/v/t1.0-9/12011398_877476119015335_7840543313058756080_n.jpg?oh=f01f9540b16c74d4e4d37c8a9ee9e12a&oe=56889C65

For sophomore Caroline Mak, the suicide of Phoebe Wang, a high school classmate who attended MIT, hit too close to home. Mak looked up to Phoebe as a mentor, someone who had inspired her to apply to MIT. On her blog, she wrote, “Phoebe gave me an anchor....She demystified, humanized a place that had intimidated me since middle school.”

“For the upperclassman mentor from my high school to commit suicide, it was a wakeup call into MIT culture I didn’t see before,” Mak said.

The semester after Phoebe’s death, Mak joined Peer Ears, a group of 40-some undergraduate students who are trained and mentored by MIT Mental Health to help students in their dorms with mental health issues. 

“In MIT culture right now, people just don’t talk to each other,” Mak said. “I wanted to improve the community through outreach. It’s really important to me that people have the right impressions of what resources are out there that are made clear.”

According to the 2015 Healthy Minds Study, 49% of undergraduate respondents said that “preferr[ing] to deal with issues on their own” and “question[ing] how serious their needs are” were factors that caused them to receive fewer mental health services than they otherwise would have received. 

The program targets students who may be more comfortable speaking with a peer, rather than an authority figure at MIT. Peer Ears are confidential and non-mandated reporters, which means that unlike staff at MIT Medical, they are not legally required to report cases of child, spousal, or elder abuse to the appropriate state agency. They are also not required to report cases of Title IX violations, such as sexual misconduct, to the MIT Title IX office, unlike members of dormitory house teams. 

The program currently covers 10 undergrad dorms and 3 sororities. Mak estimates that despite the program being in a soft launch state, 100 people across all residences have spoken to a Peer Ear. 

Taylor Sutton, a Peer Ear at Random Hall says he’s talked to peers about everything ranging from family issues to anxiety and depression.
 
“A lot of it has been, stress about clases, family issues, impostor syndrome, having trouble getting used to being at MIT, stress about the future, especially considering career fair happened recently. Last year, before I was a Peer Ear, I talked to people about relationship issues, and about general anxiety and depression.”

For most issues, students can expect confidentiality from their Peer Ears. 

“We are not required to report anything to Mental Health. We are not required to submit reports, nothing. Your conversation with us is completely confidential,” Mak said.

Peer Ears will, in most cases, point students to an appropriate resource at MIT and encourage them to follow-up and seek additional help. They may offer to make introductions or go with a student to Mental Health, but the decision to take further action is ultimately left up to the student.

Peer Ears may also discuss cases internally within the group or with their staff mentors at MIT Mental Health to seek advice about how to handle certain situations.  

“It’s important for us to have our own support network. In terms of that, we would bring it up if there’s someone we’re worried about. We wouldn’t even say their gender, we’d keep who they are as confidential as possible,” said Evelyn Florentine, a Peer Ear in Burton-Conner.

There are limits to confidentiality, however. 

One of the key differences between Peer Ears and employees of MIT Medical is that unlike employees, Peer Ears are not mandatory reporters. Massachusetts state laws designate certain professions as mandatory reporters, who are legally compelled to report cases or suspicion of abuse and neglect of children under the age of 18, elder abuse, or spousal abuse. In the case of child abuse, failure to report can result in a fine up to $1000, or in cases of willful failure to report leading to severe harm of the child, a fine up to $5000 and up to 2.5 years in prison.

Daniel Debowy, a psychiatrist at MIT Mental Health & Counseling and one of the Peer Ears’ mentors, says that if a Peer Ear came forward about a student with an issue that would normally trigger mandatory reporting laws, such as child abuse, he would need to know the student’s identity to best help them. Then, he would bring in someone at either Mental Health who currently has a relationship with the student or a member of the student’s house team to follow-up.

“One possibility, not the only way, is that the Peer Ear might tell us their name, and we might see whether there’s an internal medicine person that works with them. Then, we could highlight to their primary care provider that information has come to us that there may be a family issue - maybe that’s something they should raise with them the next time they have an office visit.

“If they didn’t have a visit scheduled, we might have a MT Mental health liaison to their dorm or someone like a GRT or RLAD to encourage them to talk to [the student] about stress,” said Debowy. 

MIT’s GRTs, graduate students who live in the undergraduate dorms, are expected to “keep members of the House team, and/or administrators informed about serious or potentially serious/dangerous resident issues,” according to the Division of Student Life’s GRT position description. In addition, they are required to inform the Housemaster and or Area Director of “key incidents in the residence hall that require follow-up, or are medical or mental health in nature.”

Confidentiality is also limited when a student is in immediate danger of causing harm to themselves or others, as in MIT Medical’s confidentiality policy. Peer Ears say they would act quickly to help the student. 

Florentine says, “If it was truly immediate danger, I’d call 911. If it reaches the level of where someone has pills, or has a gun, I would call someone immediately.”

Mak says that depending on the severity, she would bring in a member of the student’s house team, encourage them to go with her to MIT’s urgent care center, or contact the Dean on Call system.

What about a student expressing suicidal ideation? Though some Peer Ears said they would not have to report it, Deboy emphasized that he expects Peer Ears to bring up the issue at internal meetings and share the details and identity of the student that would allow Mental Health to take further action. 

“We might decide in the end that we’re not going to have the Peer Ear to do anything further. But it will probably trigger us to pursue it somehow...Peer Ears are peer support counselors, they are not supposed to be professionals. The bulk of them do understand that, but unfortunately, we need to keep clarifying it,” said Debowy. 

One case neither Mental Health nor Peer Ears are mandated to report, however, is the case of Title IX violations, which covers sexual harassment and misconduct, intimate partner violence, and stalking. Mental Health and Peer Ears join MIT’s Violence Prevention & Response center, health practitioners at MIT Medical, the Ombudsman office, and religious advisors as non-mandatory reporters, who are not required to report violations to the MIT Title IX office. In contrast, members of dormitory house teams, such as housemasters, GRTs, and RLADs are mandatory reporters. 

In any cases where confidentiality is broken, Mental Health would not identify Peer Ears as the source of the information. Debowy says this hasn’t happened yet. 

“When we're talking about the overwhelming bulk of cases, the Peer Ears aren't telling us identifying information. We haven't run into scenarios yet where we've had to break confidentiality. Not as of yet.”



