---
layout: post
published: false
author: Janelle Mansfield
link: ""
displaydate: "11-09-2015"
date: ""
category: arts
tags: null
title: Tony Kilbridge Profile
---

Footnotes to be added to explain rowing things
Still have one more source to talk to (one of tony’s boatmates from Harvard)

When I visit Tony Kilbridge, Director of Rowing and Heavyweight Men’s Coach, at the MIT Pierce Boathouse, it’s an unusually warm and sunny October morning. The banks of the Charles River are lined with fiery red and orange trees. The boathouse itself, a sagging rectangular structure hanging off the riverbank, built in the 1930’s and covered with peeling white paint, is warm and bright on the inside. A few hours ago, the crew teams were out on the water in semi-darkness and pouring rain, but the weather has cleared up now and the boathouse is quiet and peaceful, empty except for the coaches.
Kilbridge is tall and lanky, in his mid-fifties with close-cropped grey hair that is balding on top and typically covered with a baseball hat. He wears clunky boots, a flannel button down, and a puffy Patagonia vest with the MIT Crew logo embroidered on the chest. It’s his tenth year as head coach at MIT, and the fall racing season is just winding down. This fall the heavyweights have already posted promising results, including a 4th place finish in the collegiate eights race at Head of the Charles. 
Kilbridge was first introduced to rowing as a child when he and his family went to watch his father’s friend compete in the very first Head of the Charles (held 51 years ago in 1965). When he arrived at Harvard in the fall of 1978, he was inundated with advertising to join “Harvard’s #1 Sport.” He talks about his first impression of the Harvard team:
I didn’t come on the first day of practice; I came on the second day. I was still making up my mind. This was still during freshman week, classes hadn’t even started. And [John Brock, the walk-on coach] said, “Where were you yesterday?!” That gave me some idea of the level of intensity about the whole thing. 
	Harvard University is a rowing powerhouse. For years, undefeated seasons were not unusual and they enjoyed complete domination of the collegiate rowing landscape. Kilbridge now found himself a part of this rowing dynasty. 
“The big challenge was making the boat you wanted to make, rather than winning your races in the spring. The feeling was, if you made, whatever [boat you wanted]...you were gonna win most of your races,” said Kilbridge. 
Kilbridge quickly adapted to the competitive environment. He made the fastest freshman eight, which won Eastern Sprints. This victory was, “in terms of pure joy,” Kilbridge’s favorite moment in his rowing career. The success continued as his sophomore year, he made the second fastest upperclassmen eight, which went undefeated during the spring season and won Eastern Sprints. His junior year, he made the first eight, which came in second at Eastern Sprints by 0.2 seconds. 
Echoing a sentiment felt by many college rowers, Kilbridge found the friendships he made even more valuable than the victories and excitement of racing. “Overall the best thing about that is just the friends that you make. I’m still really close to those guys. I’ve rowed in the Head of the Charles now probably thirty times, most of those times with friends from college. That’s the most lasting thing I’ve gotten out of it,” he says. 
His rowing career wasn’t all smooth sailing, of course. Kilbridge had chosen to join the lightweight team as a freshman, since he weighed exactly the lightweight maximum. However, by the end of his junior year, he was 15lbs heavier than the maximum, and had to resort to drastic measures to make weight before each race. 
“My junior year, I just didn’t eat well at all, eat much at all. I did a lot of sitting in a sauna, ski clothes and stuff. it was awful. I had enough. I thought I was strong enough to row on the heavyweight team so I just switched,” Kilbridge said. 
The transition to the heavyweight team was difficult for Kilbridge because the heavyweights rowed with a different technical style than he was used to. He had originally hoped to make the first heavyweight eight, but ended up switching off between the second and third boats. Kilbridge was disappointed at the time, but now thinks of it as a blessing in disguise. 
At the time I was really angry about it, and it took me a long time to figure it out… If I had stayed on the lightweight team, that team was undefeated that year and won Sprints, and I might have just hung it up at that point and moved on because I would have been satisfied. But as it was, I was very dissatisfied when I graduated. So I kept rowing. I bought a single and trained really hard in the single, and I immediately went into coaching. So I should thank my coach for putting me in the third boat. 

(want to add some sort of line/visual break here)

After graduation, Kilbridge, who had studied American History at Harvard, went to teach history at St. Mark’s School, a private school located in Southborough, MA. As part of his job, he also coached the boy’s crew team there. This was actually his second coaching job, as he had coached his dormitory’s recreational crew team in college. 
After two years at St. Mark’s, Kilbridge wanted to get out into the world. “I was twenty two, twenty three. I wanted to meet girls and have fun and it was not happening in the woods at Southborough,” he said.
So, he chose to go to law school at Georgetown, “for all the wrong reasons...I want to reach back and smack myself in the head,” he said of his decision.  “I knew I was in trouble on one level, when i got to law school and I got the course brochure, and there’s dozens of classes… and I looked at it and said, well none of these interest me.” Kilbridge sighs and continues: 
“I did it for a long time. I enjoyed aspects of it, but overall, when I quit, I felt like I’d had a toothache for ten years and it finally went away. Don’t do that! That’s the crew thing you know. You get this stubbornness in rowing, like, I’m not really enjoying this but it has got to be good for me. It’s true when you’re rowing, but it’s not true in relationships and life and the rest of it, you know.” 
	He laughs and adds, “You can edit out all the personal advice if you want to.”
	One good thing that came of Kilbridge’s decision to become a lawyer was that he returned to Boston to work at a law firm. He and his wife, who had met while living in the same dormitory at Harvard, dated during their senior year, and then parted ways, were suddenly back in the same city. “Long, boring story short: we got back together,” says Kilbridge. 
	When Kilbridge made the decision to quit his law job, he and his wife decided to move to Virginia, settling there because it “looked like it had a good lifestyle, a good place to raise a family.” His wife, a doctor, found a job in the area immediately, but Kilbridge spent almost two years looking for work and staying home with their two boys.
“[That period] was very unsettling. I was almost 40, and there was just this fish out of water feeling, of changing your career when you’re early middle age,” said Kilbridge. Then, on the same summer day in 2001, Kilbridge heard back from two job opportunities he had applied to. He was offered the position of Associate Dean at the University of Virginia (UVA) Law School and head coach of the men’s rowing team there.  
“The difference in pay grade was substantial,” said Kilbridge. After seeking the advice of friends and family, he turned down the law school position and accepted the coaching offer. 
“It was very visceral, kind of a gut feeling,” he said of his decision. “I spent 10 years doing something i didn’t really enjoy. My dad actually urged me to take the coaching job. I had a couple friends who were professors at the UVA Law School, and I called up one of them and he said, ‘Are you kidding? Take the coaching job.’  So people who weren’t going to be facing the pay differential thought it was pretty clear what i should do.” 
The transition to coaching at the collegiate level required “a specialized knowledge of how to make a college eight go fast,” according to Kilbridge, and although he had several years of coaching experience under his belt, there was a lot of new information to learn. 
“I can’t believe they actually made the boat go forward,” he joked, referring to his first year at UVA.
Kilbridge took inspiration for his coaching from his own rowing experience and friends who were also coaching. He tried out different rowing drills and workouts, and began to develop the vocabulary he uses to teach the rowing stroke, all while keeping the team running smoothly. 
“You know what it means to be like a duck? Here’s number three piece of personal advice for you. You gotta be like a duck. A duck on the surface of the water is very smooth, cruising along very peacefully, but under the water, he’s paddling like a mother as hard as possible. So that’s what I was trying to do.”
Despite the challenge (or perhaps because of it), Kilbridge immediately fell in love with the job. His rowers appreciated his organization and candidness. Will Oliver, the current lightweight men’s coach at MIT, rowed under Kilbridge during his first years at UVA. 
	“Tony is an exceptionally organized, well thought out guy,” says Oliver of his first impressions of Kilbridge as a coach. “He’s an impressive guy, he came in, told us what he intended to do with the team, how he was gonna try to make us faster, and we knew that he had a pretty good rowing background in terms of what he’d done himself, and that certainly never hurts, to feel like somebody’s got relevant experience. He made a big group of guys feel like they were in good hands.” 
	
(want to add some sort of line/visual break here)

Throughout this entire time post-Harvard, Kilbridge was training in the single. 
“Yep, I’ve flipped over in all kinds of exciting places,” jokes Kilbridge, referring to the difficulty of rowing a single. The small boats are only as wide as a standard football stadium seat, and are known for unforgivingly tipping their rowers into the water when thrown off balance. 
Kilbridge initially approached master’s rowing with the same tenacity that drove him to success in collegiate rowing. However, he found during law school that intensity was not always a good thing. After recovering from a back injury, four knee surgeries, and shoulder surgery, he emerged healthy on the other side and with a more tempered approach to training. His master’s rowing career began to take off after that. 
Although Kilbridge tends to skim over this part of his rowing career, he enjoyed considerable success in master’s rowing. His master’s rowing career has included gold, silver, and bronze medals at the U.S. Master’s National Championships, racing in the Head of the Charles with other Harvard alumni, and competing in the famous Henley Royal Regatta in England. 
	Kilbridge laughs as he recalls his race in the doubles category at Henley. “It was a great trip. We hit one of those upright boons like twenty strokes into the start of the race and broke an oar. So our regatta lasted about 20 strokes.”
	Kilbridge takes a moment to wax philosophical on training in the single. 
“Rowing a single can be rewarding, because if you succeed, it’s one hundred percent you, but it can be very discouraging because when you fail it’s one hundred percent you. It’s a lot harder than sweep rowing. It feels different than sweep rowing. It’s a lot more like erging. Every time you go to the catch it’s like ah! you know, you never get that light feeling of flying along the water. It’s like weightlifting in a boat.”
Even though he enjoyed master’s rowing, Kilbridge says, “to me there’s nothing that’s more fun than rowing eights in college. That’s why all these alumni just never go away; they’re always around. I don’t think you can match it. It’s not like I’m ever trying to relive that or whatever, but it’s very special.”
Nowadays, Kilbridge finds himself taking it a little easier. “When the weather’s perfect I’ll go out [to row]. If there’s a cloud or it’s a tiny bit chilly I might not,” he jokes. 

(want to add some sort of line/visual break here)

	After five years of coaching at UVA, Kilbridge and his wife made another big move. His wife wanted to move to a city with better career opportunities. Kilbridge applied to a new position that had just opened up at MIT: Director of Rowing and head coach of the heavyweight men’s team. His wife also received an offer in the city, and they moved their family to Boston. 
Under his leadership, the crew program at MIT has grown in leaps and bounds. The heavyweight men have improved on their league placement at EARC sprints and average erg scores for every year in the past four years. Kilbridge is cautiously optimistic about the team’s speed this year. “Testing so far shows that they’re a little stronger, a little faster than last year. It’s early on, trying to keep the expectations under control, but we feel good about it,” he said. 
Kilbridge faced a huge challenge when he initially came to MIT. MIT has four varsity crew teams: heavyweight men, lightweight men, openweight women, and lightweight women. When Kilbridge was hired on, all four crews had been underperforming for years, and often were either too slow or had too few rowers to compete at big regattas. 
MIT’s crew program is an NCAA Division I sport, unlike other MIT athletic teams, which are Division III, and the crews face incredibly tough competition in the northeast region. However, the team has historically been competitive in the league as well. 
“The alumni were up in arms,” said Kilbridge. MIT’s athletic department and the rowing alumni funded a study of MIT crew in 2005 to see how they could improve the program. The study results called for changes to the coaching staff and the creation of a new position: a director of rowing, to oversee all four crews in the boathouse and create a more cooperative atmosphere. Kilbridge was hired to be both the director of rowing and the men’s heavyweight coach. When he took the helm in 2006: 
“There was dysfunction everywhere. The coaches didn’t like each other, the cox boxes were actually locked up downstairs so that one team wouldn’t take the other team’s cox boxes. And then the team itself, it was just dysfunctional on every level. So I looked at it and said, I can do better than this.”
	The atmosphere in the boathouse and between teams improved quickly after Kilbridge took over. However, the performance of the heavyweight men’s crew was extremely variable for Kilbridge’s first several years. 
	The crew he took on his first year had a lot of talent and in 2009 they had “the best year this team has had since the ‘70’s,” Kilbridge says. The crew beat Princeton, Yale, and Dartmouth, and finished in the middle of their league EARC at sprints (typically, the team finishes in the bottom third). The crew was so successful that they decided to travel to England compete in Henley that summer, and made it to semi-finals in the Ladies’ Challenge Plate. 
	However, when the class of 2009 graduated, there was no one to fill their spots. “We had several years where we just had no one, no one good,” said Kilbridge. There were some years when the team could only field a four. A top half crew in the EARC is typically able to fill three to four eights and one or two fours of rowers, so Kilbridge knew the team was nowhere near the size it needed to be in order to be competitive. 
Recruiting challenges are part of the reason it took several years to build the team size and speed to its current level. 
“I didn’t quite grasp how difficult it was to recruit here, or how big a role recruiting was playing in this league,” said Kilbridge. When he rowed as an undergraduate, varsity crew programs were comprised entirely of former walk-ons, who learned to row their freshman year and then progressed up through the ranks during their next three years. However, over time schools began to offer more athletic scholarships, and more teams are able to recruit experienced rowers. Now, it’s not unusual for very competitive schools, such as the University of Washington or Harvard, to have multiple Olympians in their varsity eight lineup. 
For a school like MIT, which doesn’t offer athletic scholarships, it’s not possible to recruit like the top teams in the EARC do. However, according to Kilbridge the quality of rowing recruits at MIT has risen especially in the past five years, and that has contributed greatly to the team’s improved speed. He talked about the team’s recent progress:
“If we are successful this year in being better than last year, which so far we are, then it will be five continuous years of progress, which is unusual in sports. Evan has done a really good job with the recruiting, so we’re getting better and better, and all the guys we have now are pretty good. The good guys we have now are really pretty good. We’re still not anywhere near the level of some crews, but it has come a long way.”
Kilbridge pauses. This whole summary of the team’s performance began when I asked him what it took to build the team up. “Patience,” he says after a moment. “That’s the answer I should have given you. Patience.” 
(want to add some sort of line/visual break here)


“There’s two big parts - there’s recruiting kids into the program and then there’s building a team culture,” Kilbridge says of growing the program.  
	Kilbridge knows his rowers have to balance a difficult school workload with the demands of a Division I sport. He also knows that his rowers tend to be very self-motivated and take an intellectual view of the sport. Kilbridge uses these characteristics of the team to his advantage, by focusing on efficiency in the technique of his crew, and encouraging internal leadership on the team. 
	“It’s hard to tell a bunch of MIT students to just like turn your brain off and do exactly what the guy in front of you does,” says Nate Colgan, a class of 2015 alum. “Evan and Tony recognize that we’re not just brainless racehorses that you put in a boat.”
 	According to Colgan, Kilbridge does a good job of explaining the technical intricacies of the rowing stroke to his rowers, so they understand why they row the way they do. Kilbridge takes time before each practice to break down the day’s technical focus, which is the part of the rowing stroke that they will focus on during practice. Kilbridge usually chooses drills and workouts that highlight the technical focus for that day. The team also regularly films their rowing and reviews the footage, so the rowers can see what they need to improve on. 
	“I always thought that Tony and Evan thought of their coaching style as giving us the tools to refine our own stroke,” said Colgan. “By giving us those mental checks--like on the pause drills--ideally it gets to the point where the rowers can use those thought processes that the coaches teach them to refine their own stroke. It’s hard as a rower to know if your stroke is right or wrong.”
	Another practice implemented by Kilbridge is the goal setting meeting. At the beginning of the fall and spring seasons, the rowers internally decided on their goals for the coming season. They then present their goals to the coaches, and the coaches will set the workouts and erg goals based on that. 
“They have a higher respect for their rowers [than other coaches],” said Colgan. “They’re very big on team leadership.”
	“It’s a less direct coaching style in terms of motivation. He shows us how to get there but the drive comes from the team buying in. Tony just sets an expectation. He’s not yelling at you, but you know,” said current senior and captain Matthew Miklasevich. 
	Both Colgan and Miklasevich mentioned that one of the things that make Kilbridge an effective coach is his personality and the effort he makes to get to know his rowers and a sense that he cares about their wellbeing outside of practice. 
	“He was very in touch with the rowers, their responsibilities outside of the boathouse,” said Colgan. “You can tell they care a lot about the progression of their rowers.”
	“I felt that he cared about who I was as a person, not just as a rower,” said Miklasevich. “They’re really accommodating of life at MIT in general. I think [Tony] does a good job of being patient, rolling with the punches, just making sure the program’s heading in the right direction.”
There’s no doubt that Kilbridge cares about the team and finding ways to overcome the challenges facing them. “It’s really difficult to on the one hand keep driving and be really competitive and be expecting the best, and on the other hand not shoot yourself in the head when things go wrong,” said Kilbridge. 
He looks out the window of the boathouse, where sunlight is sparking on the Charles River. It’s a windy day and the water is choppy, but those are typical rowing conditions in Boston. Crews learn to adapt to the chop and row proficiently in a headwind.
“I’ve always felt comfortable in the job, even from the beginning. I like that age group of people; I like working with people who are motivated,” he says. “I love the sport and being on the water. I’ve always liked it, from the beginning.”




