---
layout: post
published: false
title: "P.S. It is spelled \"Ville.\""
category: science
---

 	
    “There has never been another way to spell the Vil, it’s always been, V-i-l.” I politely smiled. For the past two days I had been on a hunt to discover what the correct spelling of the “Vil/Ville” was. The location behind the spelling conundrum is a small segment of Wellesley adjacent to the college. The Vil/Ville nickname is a fond term given to the village by Wellesley College students.  Students often travel in packs to sniff out a bargain at the Gap or to visit the local watering hole, Starbucks.  
	Somewhere between the day LSD became illegal and the 2001 Rolling Stones article, “The Highly-Charged Erotic Life of the Wellesley Girl,” the spelling of Vil/Ville dramatically changed with the addition of an L and an E. The pronunciation remains the same. Residents and shopkeepers of the town of Wellesley gave no opinion. In fact, they were shocked to hear about the spelling conundrum. They had no idea what I was talking about. 
	The Associate Editor of Wellesley Magazine, Lisa Scanlon ‘99, was the most helpful with explaining why it’s supposed to be spelled V-I-L. Back in the olden days, first year students at the college were housed in the V-I-L. The upperclassmen resident assistants who lived in the V-I-L were known as V-I-L juniors. Wellesley College has very important documentation of these events and the correct spelling of the V-I-L is in Wellesley Magazine’s Official Handbook. The most recent alum I was able to interview was from the class of 1984. For security reasons, she does not wish to disclose her name or any information besides that she would not think to spell V-I-L-L-E any other way.  This information left me at a standstill. With the inability of getting older alumnae to chime in and feverous, younger alumnae, being outraged at the loss of L and E, I was not sure what my next step was. 
	Fast forward a year and a half, I am still unable to define when the change occurred. A very important person whose name I will not mention for my own protection, let’s call her Mrs. V-I-L, demands that my job is not to pin point the historical date of the spelling change but to educate the ignorant. To avoid any fights breaking out, the Public Affairs team avoids the word all together. Any sort of social media posting of the word can lead to seriously snarky comments (see picture above.) Interestingly enough, a recent post in my residence hall’s Google group requests for ride for a quick trip to the “V-I-L.” I followed up with the email and did not see any foul play. The search continues with no end in sight.   
