---
layout: post
published: false
title: A Culture of Communication
category: politics
author: Kirsten
---

## A Culture of Communication

	When I was a freshman, I remember going to an MIT info session and thinking how cool it was that an university was promoting hacking, a somewhat prohibited activity where students add a fun decoration to a building on campus. I admired the culture MIT promoted, one where students felt safe enough that they could express themselves in a quirky manner. Now as a student at MIT, I fear that things are changing.
	Over the past month, talk has been spreading around campus about the painting over of wall murals at Burton Conner, an undergraduate dorm at MIT. Since I don’t personally live at Burton Conner, I honestly didn’t know much about it until I heard from some friends who lived on the floors that were affected.
	Anger. Frustration. Bitterness. It all came out when they explained their current living situation to me. Not really knowing what the whole story was, I politely nodded my head in agreement as I listened along. As they explained how it felt to have their wall murals painted over without any notice, I could see how ignored they felt. I understood where they were coming from, but I wanted to know what MIT’s official response was on the matter.
	In multiple emails sent to the dorm, the Burton Conner Housemaster Anne McCants explained how many of the murals painted over were in violation of Title IX, an amendment that protects individuals from discrimination on the basis of gender.  Since these murals were on MIT property, it was possible that people outside the community could interpret these murals as support towards the content of the murals. Therefore, they needed to be removed. In addition, some of these murals did not follow the policies for promoting a supportive and safe environment as written in the Mind and Handbook, a policy book about Student Life at MIT.  All of these reasons were, in my opinion, legitimate reasons for those in charge to feel the need to paint over these murals.
	However my concern, which is similar to many others, is the lack of due process for implementing these kinds of changes. Regardless of whether students would be able to have an impact on the decision, it is important that people know what is happening and have time to process the changes.  The fact of the matter is that stressed out and exhausted MIT students do not enjoy change. Especially when that change is taking place somewhere very familiar to them: Home.
	Bad news will always be bad, but allowing people a chance to express their concerns or their support may help coming to terms with the news. Emails out to the dorm, while convenient, don’t really allow for the kinds of conversations that need to happen for these kinds of challenges. Instead, face-to-face conversations will allow for better dialogue where students can feel they have an opportunity to share their feelings. 
	I understand that in times like these, it’s often when the worst side of students can come out. I’m sure Anne has received more than a couple unfriendly emails concerning this matter that she did not deserve, and I’m sorry that students had to react that way. But I don’t think restricting modes of communication about the matter to only Dean Baker, as mentioned in one of her emails, will help. Instead, a culture of communication needs to be fostered at MIT. We need to sit down and talk to each other to understand what went wrong.
	While this is easier said than done, I think it’s a step back towards the ideals I associate with MIT.  Students ultimately need to feel comfortable in their community to be able to be creative, discover new science, invent new things, and, of course, to hack. Although the Burton Conner incident is a localized issue on campus, I believe it presents an opportunity to set a good precedent for future challenges we face as a community. By keeping an open mind and engaging in conversation, MIT can continue to maintain its position as the world’s best university, fully supported by its proud students and alumni.  

